Alert Description

This alert indicates that one or more Compliance Suites managed by the OpenShift Compliance Operator have entered a NON-COMPLIANT, ERROR, or INCONSISTENT state.

NON-COMPLIANT – One or more compliance rules defined by the selected security profile (for example, CIS or NIST) have failed.
ERROR – The compliance scan encountered an error and could not complete successfully.
INCONSISTENT – The scan produced incomplete or unreliable results that require further investigation.

When this alert is triggered, the cluster configuration no longer satisfies all the requirements defined by the applied compliance profile. The failed compliance checks must be reviewed to identify the affected security controls and determine whether remediation is required.

Impact
The cluster is no longer fully compliant with the selected compliance benchmark.
Security, regulatory, or organizational compliance requirements may not be satisfied.
Failed compliance checks can indicate:
Security configuration weaknesses
Missing security controls
Policy violations
Incorrect cluster or node configuration
Manual investigation and remediation may be required before the cluster can be considered compliant again.
Trigger Condition

The alert is triggered when the following Prometheus expression evaluates to true:

compliance_operator_compliance_state{name=~".+", namespace="openshift-compliance"} > 0

This indicates that at least one Compliance Suite is in one of the following states:

NON-COMPLIANT
ERROR
INCONSISTENT
Investigation Procedure
Step 1 – Verify Compliance Operator Installation

Ensure the Compliance Operator is installed and running.

oc get csv -n openshift-compliance

Verify that the installed operator version is the expected release (for example, v1.9.1).

Step 2 – Verify the Active ScanSettingBinding

Identify which compliance profiles and scan settings are currently applied.

oc get scansettingbinding -A

Example:

apiVersion: compliance.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: ScanSettingBinding
metadata:
  name: ocp4-cis
  namespace: openshift-compliance
profiles:
- name: ocp4-cis
- name: ocp4-cis-node
settingsRef:
  name: default

This determines:

Compliance profiles being evaluated
Scan settings used during execution
Step 3 – Verify Compliance Suite Status

Check the overall compliance status.

oc get compliancesuites -A

Expected states include:

COMPLIANT
NON-COMPLIANT
ERROR
INCONSISTENT

Record the affected Compliance Suite.

Step 4 – Verify Compliance Scan Completion

List all compliance scans.

oc get compliancescans -n openshift-compliance

Ensure every scan has reached the DONE phase.

Important

Compliance scans progress through the following phases:

PENDING
→ LAUNCHING
→ RUNNING
→ AGGREGATING
→ DONE

Do not review or apply remediations until the scan has completed successfully and reached the DONE phase.

Step 5 – Identify Failed Compliance Checks

Retrieve all failed compliance checks.

oc get compliancecheckresults -n openshift-compliance | grep -i FAIL

This identifies which compliance rules failed during the scan.

Step 6 – Review the Failed Compliance Check

Inspect the failed check in detail.

oc describe compliancecheckresult <check-name> -n openshift-compliance

Review:

Description
Severity
Rationale
Warning
Current Result

These fields explain why the rule failed and its security significance.

Step 7 – Determine Whether a Remediation Exists

Check whether the failed rule has an associated remediation.

oc get complianceremediations -n openshift-compliance

or

oc get complianceremediations <remediation-name> -n openshift-compliance

Possible outcomes:

A ComplianceRemediation object exists.
No remediation exists, indicating manual intervention is required.
Step 8 – Review the Proposed Remediation

Before applying any remediation, review the following fields:

Description
Instructions
Rationale

Determine:

What configuration change will be made
Whether the change is appropriate for your environment
Whether the change could impact running workloads
Step 9 – Apply an Approved Remediation

If the remediation has been reviewed and approved:

oc patch complianceremediation <remediation-name> \
-n openshift-compliance \
--type=merge \
-p '{"spec":{"apply":true}}'

Note

Some remediations create MachineConfig resources or require a node reboot. Always evaluate operational impact before applying changes in production.

Step 10 – Rerun the Compliance Scan

After remediation has been applied, rerun the compliance scan.

oc get compliancescans -n openshift-compliance

Wait until the scan reaches the DONE phase.

Step 11 – Verify Compliance

Confirm that the failed checks have been resolved.

oc get compliancecheckresults -n openshift-compliance | grep -i FAIL

Also verify:

oc get compliancesuites -A

The Compliance Suite should return to the COMPLIANT state.

Decision Matrix
Scenario	Recommended Action
Automated remediation available	Review, test in a non-production environment, and apply after approval.
No remediation available	Perform manual investigation, implement the required configuration change, and rerun the compliance scan.
ERROR state	Investigate scan execution failures before reviewing compliance results.
INCONSISTENT state	Investigate scan completion and data aggregation issues before trusting the results.
Production Best Practices

Use the Compliance Operator as a compliance assessment and remediation assistant rather than enabling unrestricted automatic remediation.

Review every failed compliance check before taking action.
Validate remediation changes in a development or test environment before production deployment.
Follow the organization's change management process for configuration changes.
Rerun compliance scans after remediation to confirm that the issue has been resolved.
Enable automatic remediation only for low-risk, non-disruptive configuration changes after appropriate testing.
Remediation Risk Classification
Risk Level	Example	Recommended Action
Low	Labels, ConfigMaps, non-disruptive configuration	Automatic remediation may be appropriate after validation.
Medium	OAuth configuration, RBAC changes	Review and approve before applying.
High	MachineConfig, kubelet configuration, kernel settings, node reboot	Manual approval and planned maintenance window required.
Critical	Control plane configuration changes	Follow formal change management (CAB) and perform manual implementation.
Key Points
Every failed compliance rule is reported as a ComplianceCheckResult.
Not every failed rule has a corresponding ComplianceRemediation.
Automated remediation should only be applied after understanding its operational impact.
Compliance should always be verified by rerunning the scan and confirming that the Compliance Suite returns to the COMPLIANT state.
